King Elara
Anuradhapura was ruled by a king named Elara before King Dutugemunu aascended the throne. King Elara came from Chola country. He collected the whole income which received to the country from agricultural affairs and the trade affairs at the Mathota harbour located in the coastal area in the western side of Anuradhapura. He was a righteous king. A chariot of the king hit a pagoda and a part of it was damaged. Mahawamsa states that king Elara took measures to repair the pagoda.
It is said that a cow came to the king Elara's palace and tolled a bell to inform the crime committed by the king's son by running his chariot over her calf (the cow which came to the place was the mother of the slain calf).

5.3 King Dutugemunu
King Dutugemunu was an intelligent and efficient ruler who reigned our country.His father was king Kavantissa. His mother was Queen Vihara Maha Devi. He had a brother named Tissa. This royal family lived in Magama kingdom.  Southern and South-Eastern parts in Sri Lanka belonged to the old Magama kingdom. This region was known as Ruhunu Rata then.
Prince Dutugemunu realized that he could develop Anuradhapura if he had a chance to rule it. He was determined to rule Anuradhapura when he was old enough to do so.
  
King Kavantissa understood the objective of prince Dutugemunu and prepared a group of strong people suitable for the purpose and took steps to increase the production of food. He sent prince Dutugemunu’s brother, prince Tissa to Digamadulla to achieve this objective. Then Digamadulla was present day Ampara area. Prince Dutugemunu and king Elara had a face to face combat in the place of Vijithapura. Forty four years rule of King Elara came to an end with his death. 

In this	fight prince Dutugemunu was supported by ten clever and intelligent army commanders to defeat King Elara. Nandimithra, Suranimala, Mahasona, Gotayimbara, Theraputtabhaya, Bharana, Velusumana, Kanchadeva, Pussadeva, Labhiya Vasabha were those ten army commanders. The inscriptions made by some of these commanders have been discovered. After prince Dutugemunu became the king in Anuradhapura, these ten army commanders were known as ‘Ten Great Giants’ (Dasa Maha Yodhayo). The tusker called ‘Kandula’ too was a great support to the king.
King Dutugemunu built several topes (Dagebas) and religious places in Anuradhapura. Miriswetiya, Ruwanweliseya and Lowamahapaya were some of them. The king passed away	 before	 he could finish the construction work of Ruwanweliseya Dageba.  Later its work was completed by king Saddhatissa, the brother of king Dutugemunu. Historical records say that king Dutugemunu constructed ninety nine Dagebas and religious places. In addition, the king did much work for the benefit of the citizens. The king ordered his subjects to pay respect to king Elara’s grave whenever they went passing it.
King Dutugemunu started constructing Ruwanweli Seya. In historical sources it has been introduced as Maha Tupa. The name Rathnamali has been used in books written in Pali language. It is said that the bodily relics of the Lord Buddha, which had been deposited in Ramagama Dageba in India was later deposited in Ruwanweli Stupa. At the initial stage, the height of the Stupa was 300 feet and diameter of the base of its nucleus was 298 feet. The construction work	of this	Stupa was finished by king Saddhatissa. His son, king Lajjitissa made some renovation work in Ruwanweli Stupa, but historical or archaeological sources do not substantiate the fact that the Stupa was enlarged by any one.
Prince Saddhatissa showed the half-constructed Ruwanweli Stupa after covering the unfinished part with a piece	of white cloth to king Dutugemunu who was at his deathbed.

People made impressive stories about king Dutugemunu, his parents, his brother and his army commanders who supported him in the fight on account of the king’s heroism. Though the king was known as ‘Dutugemunu’, his real name was ‘Gamini Abhaya’. The name Dutugemunu was used after he became the king. The word ‘Dutu’ derives from the Sanskrit word ‘Drushtha’. Its meaning is ‘intelligent’. Your history teacher will tell you stories about king Dutugemunu in the classroom.Though the achievement of any objective is difficult, it can be done by acting intelligently and courageously along with proper planning. Being loyal to one’s country and religion, respecting those who deserve and loving his country men are some prominent qualities that could be seen in King Dutugemunu’s character. You, who have been born in a country where such great kings lived, too should make an effort to live in the same manner.

Important Points
1. King Dutugemunu united the country.
2. The king hailed from Magama.3. The parents and the brother of King Dutugemunu helped him immensely to succeed.
4. Ten clever and intelligent army commanders assisted the king to unite the country.
5. Mirisawetiya, Ruwanweliseya and Lowamahapaya were built by this king.
6. King Elara who ruled Anuradhapura before King Dutugemunu was a righteous king. He ruled Anuradhapura for forty four years. 

