5.7 King Dhathusena
King Dhathusena’s father was a person named Datanama. King Dhathusena had a younger brother named Salathisbo. Six invaders including Pandu, Parinda, Khudda Parinda who came from South India had usurped power and were ruling Anuradhapura before King Dhathusena came into power.  The country was liberated from the invaders by king Dhathusena. He belonged to the lineage (dynasty) of Maurya.
King Dhathusena’s service to the country is mainly seen in his irrigational constructions. There are records in history books that he constructed eighteen large tanks and eighteen small tanks.  ‘Kala Wewa’ in Anuradhapura was one of his great irrigational works. It is very useful to the people living in Anuradhapura. The canal called ‘Yodha Ela’ connecting ‘Kala Wewa’ and ‘ Tisa Wewa’ in Anuradhapura was constructed by him. Its length is 54 miles. Its gradient is six inches per one mile. This canal is known as ‘Jaya Ganga’ too.
King Dhathusena made a great contribution to the development of Buddhism in the country.  He built several Viharas (temples) as well as renovated the dilapidated ones. Mahawamsa says that he built eighteen temples. He constantly attended to the needs of monks. 
The king reconstructed the ‘Maha Pali’ alms hall (Dana Salawa) to which the monks arrived in to have their meals.
King Dhathusena ruled this country for eighteen years. He had two sons named ‘Kashyapa’ and ‘Mugalan’ and a daughter. Since most of the people were engaged in agriculture at the time, the king paid his attention to develop the irrigation system. The king performed in an exemplary way to serve for	the benefit	of the monks who acted to save this country. All of this information will help you to shape up your life. 

Important Points
1. King Dhathusena belonged to a dynasty called Maurya.
2. Irrigation works such as ‘Kala Wewa’ and ‘Yodha Ela’ were constructed by king Dhathusena. He constructed eighteen large tanks and eighteen small tanks.
3. He made a great contribution to the development of Buddhism.

