5.4 King Valagamba
King Valagamba was another great ruler who reigned our country. King Saddhatissa was his father. Historical sources do not state who his mother was. He had three brothers named Thulattana, Lajjatissa and Naga.  His brother Naga became the king later and was known as Kallatanaga. Queen Somadevi was King Valagamba’s wife.
King Valagamba’s rule was a little difficult time. He had to face a group of invaders who came from South India and a problem created by a Brahmin called ‘Tissa’ who protested against him. However, the king, who was wise and brave, overcame all his difficulties.
Abayagiri Stupa in Anuradhapura was constructed by King Valagamba. After constructing the Stupa  and its temple, the king offered it to a Bhikkhu called  Kupikkala Tissa Thero who had assisted him much when the king was in a time of stress. The king offered Abhayagiriya temple to the monk in order to pay him gratitude. The Abhayagiri temple later became an international education centre.
Another important event that took place in King Valagamba’s rule was writing of  Buddhist religion in books. Until then the monks had preserved Buddhism by learning it by heart.  The doctrine preached by Lord Buddha includes in the Thripitaka (the three scriptures). The transformation of Thripitaka from oral tradition into the written form is called ‘writing down’ or 'inscribing'. It was written in  ‘Aluviharaya’, a temple in Mathale.

Abhayagiri Stupa was built by King Valagamba. He offered the Stupa to a monk named Kupikkala Tissa. At the initial stage of its construction work, the height of the Stupa was 350 feet.  The diameter of the nucleus of its base was 355 feet. Its present height is	245 feet. There	is no historical proof to find what sacred relic has been deposited in	the Stupa. King Gajabahu I enlarged the size of the Stupa and built four gates in its compound. Four vestibules (Vahalkada) were built in four main directions during King Kanittatissa’s rule. A large number of monastery buildings belonged to the Abhyagiri Vihara (temple).

There was a terrible famine during the time when King Valagamba was hiding in the forest. This famine, which was a result of not having rain for years, was called ‘Beminitiyasaya’(the famine named Beminitiya). Some Buddhist monks, who had learnt the Thripitaka by heart, too passed away due to the famine. The king was intelligent enough to understand that it was difficult to preserve	 Buddhism only through the process of oral tradition. Moreover, it would be harmful to the valuable Buddhist doctrine. Therefore he made necessary arrangements to transform it into the written form. It was a noble service done to the Buddhists living all over the world by the Sri Lankans.
The king conferred caves to the monks. Several inscriptions in which his name appears have been found. In the inscriptions his name is mentioned as ‘Pitha Raja’ (father king). It was another name used to introduce him then. Mahawamsa says that the king earned this name because he looked after his brother’s son as a father after his brother died. His brother was king Kallatanaga. The name ‘Pithu Raja’ has been referred to as ‘Pitha Maha Raja’ and ‘Pitha Raja’ in the inscriptions.
The queen Soma Devi, the wife of king Valagamba too was a brave woman. When the king had problems from a group of invaders from South India, she went forward to protect the king without fear. They abducted the queen and took her to South India. The king brought her back to Sri Lanka after defeating the enemies. He made her his consort. Even contemplating of a queen who was so brave and loyal to the country makes us feel proud.
King Valagamba did many things for the benefit	of the	people.	He was interested in building Pirivenas (educational institutes in temples for monks) to enhance the education of monks. He gave instructions to build a Stupa called Somaramaya in memory of the place where queen Soma Devi went forward to the  enemies. That stupa was offered to the monks.
The way that king Valagamba strived to work for	the benefit of the country by overcoming the hardships he encountered sets a good example to you. You too should be determined to shape up your own life by taking the intelligent and far-sighted king’s life as an example. 

Important Points
1. King Saddhatissa was the father of prince Valagamba.
2. During the ruling time of King Valagamba, he had to face some troubles from enemies.
3. Queen Soma Devi, his wife, was a brave woman.
4. The events such as writing Thripitaka in books and building Abhayagiri Stupa were some great services rendered by King Valagamba.


