5.6 King Mahasen
King Mahasen was a great king who ruled our country. His father was king Gotabhaya. King Mahasen had a brother named Jettatissa. There are no historical records about the mother of  king Mahasen. 
King Mahasen made a great contribution to develop the irrigation system of Sri Lanka. He constructed sixteen tanks and one main canal. There are a few large tanks that belong to his irrigation activities. Minneriya tank is a major one among them. Its bund is of one and a quarter miles in length. It is 4,670 acres large. In ancient time it was known as ‘Minihira Wewa’. The tank then known as ‘Wallurawapi’ is called ‘Hurulu Wewa’ today. ‘Kanadara Wewa’ in Mihintale was also constructed by him. In ancient time it was known as ‘Khanu Wewa’.
King Mahasen built several temples. ‘Jethawanaramaya’ in Anuradhapura is a major one among them.  It is believed that the ‘Pati’ (belt) relic of the Lord Buddha has been deposited in the ‘Jethawana Dageba’ built by him. Minneriya Viharaya, Gokanna Viharaya, Ekapilla Viharaya, and Dasengala Viharaya, are religious places built by the king. In addition to the construction, he renovated some temples in various parts of the country. He offered robes to the monks. He ruled the country for 27 years. 
Since the king rendered a great service for the	benefit	of the people, he was much respected by his subjects. He was considered to be a god because he constructed tanks as large as oceans. 
King Mahasen constructed the Jethawana Stupa in Anuradhapura.
Even today he is worshipped in the name of God of Minneriya, ‘Minneri Deviyo’. 
Some fanes (Devala) built on behalf  of him can be seen in Polonnaruwa area.
King Mahasen strived hard to serve both his country and his subjects. Therefore, he is worshipped as a god. It sets a good example to you. You should carefully study the activities of such great kings who ruled our country and think of serving your country and its people when you become adults in the future. That is how you learn an important lesson from history.
Jethawana Stupa was built by king Mahasen. According to historical sources, the Stupa was of 400 feet in height after completion of its construction work. The diameter of the base of its nucleus was 370 feet. It was the biggest Stupa in Sri Lanka.  It was also the biggest Stupa made out of bricks in the world. The historical sources say that the ‘Pati (belt)’ relic of the Lord Buddha has been deposited in this Stupa.  Like in Abhayagiri temple, many monastery buildings were built in the ‘Jethawana’ temple.

Important Points
1. King Mahasen made a great service to the agriculture and irrigation system of this country.
2. Minneriya tank was constructed by King Mahasen. Its bund is one and a quarter miles in length. In ancient time it was known as ‘Minihira Wewa’.
3. King Mahasen built the ‘Jethawana Stupa’ in Anuradhapura. It was the tallest building made of bricks in Asia.
4. King Mahasen is worshipped as ‘God of Minneriya’ even today.
