1 Defining History
Introduction
At the end of this lesson, you will 
learn what history is, the importance of learning history and how to understand history which covers a long period of time.
1.1 What is History?
People have been living on this earth for 
quite a long time. During that time,
(a) They have lived in different parts of 
the world.
(b) They have made their environment    
conducive for their living. 
(c) They have maintained relationships 
with each other.
The story that describes these past events 
is history. In short, history means studying 
and describing the details of the people 
who lived in the past.
Present Future Past
1.2 How to Study History...
We did not exist thousand years ago.
Therefore, we do not have any knowledge 
of what happened in the past. Pay your 
attention to what is given below.
(a) I haven’t seen my grandfather’s 
       mother.
(b) I haven’t seen how my school was 
built.
(c) I do not know about the elders who     
       served our village.
All of those events belong to the history 
of your life. Then, how do you know 
about them?
(a) My father has told me about the 
mother of my grandfather.
(b) An article in our school magazine 
has described how my school was 
constructed.
(c) Our principal sir told us about the 
elders who served our village, in the school assembly.                       

When you learn history, you may have 
questions such as these;
(a)  What was the shape of the throne on 
which our kings had sat?
(b) What type of currency was used in 
our country in ancient times?
 Such a throne has been placed in the 
Colombo National Museum.
 We have seen many old coins kept in 
the museum.
You can realize what a throne is by seeing 
it with your own eyes. We are able to get 
some knowledge about coins by seeing 
them.
We learn history referring to books written 
in ancient times; if not, with the help of 
the remaining articles used by the people 
who lived in the past. In addition to these 
two ways, we can learn about history 
through stories about the past narrated by 
our elders. There is a common term used 
to introduce everything which helps us to 
study history; that is ‘a source’. 

There are two types of sources which are 
useful to study history.
(a) Literary sources – (ancient written 
records such as old books and 
folktales)
(b) Archaeological sources – (what is 
remaining now, which belonged to 
the past, such as old articles, building 
constructions and their ruins)
Examples:
Human skeletons, various things left after 
being used by man for his food.
Some sources which are helpful to study the history of Sri Lanka
Source: Deepawamsa
Type: Literary Source
Time of Composition / Construction: 4th Century AD
Author: Not known

Source: Mahawamsa
Type: Literary Source
Time of Composition / Construction: 5th Century AD
Author: Mahanama Thero of Diksanda Senewiya Pirivena, which was affiliated to Mahaviharaya

Source: Galvihara in Polonnaruwa
Type: Archaeological Source
Time of Composition / Construction: 12th Century AD
Author: King Parakramabahu I

1.3 Benefits of Learning History
You might think whether there is any 
use of learning about the things which 
occurred in the past. Though they belong 
to the past, we can use the message given 
by them to make our present better.
Let’s try to explain this fact with a simple 
example. One of the serious problems 
that we face today is the unfavourable 
environmental condition caused as 
a result of utilizing insecticides and 
chemical manure. 
But in the past, Sri Lanka was known 
as the Granary of the East because of 
the successful methods practised in 
agriculture. There is not any evidence 
which tells us that there existed any 
environmental pollution that can be seen 
today.
A means to solve our present problem 
can be found by understanding how 
people were engaged in agriculture in an 
environmental friendly way in the past.
We need to look back at the history to 
understand how the things that we see 
and hear at present came into existence. 
For example, one day you may wonder 
how the scripts that you write today were 
formed. Perhaps one of your friends may 
ask you the same question. To understand 
the evolution of scripts, its history has 
to be studied.  Writing scripts in Sri 
Lanka has a history of about 2,250 years. 

By gaining a good understanding of the 
successes and failures of our ancestors, 
we can have a guidance to solve the 
problems that we face today. Furthermore, 
the light of that knowledge guides us to 
have an understanding of how our future 
should be and how our country can be 
developed in the future.

1.4 How Does History Measure Time?
History means a long period of time. It is 
important to measure it (time) accurately, 
when we study history. There are a few 
methods to measure the time of history 
in which many events had happened. The 
two methods used most frequently are;
(a). Before Christ (B.C.)
(b). Anno Domini (A.D.)These two methods are based on the year 
of birth of Jesus Christ. Accordingly,
The time period before the birth of Jesus 
Christ is called ‘before Christ (B.C.)’,
The time period after the birth of Jesus 
Christ is known as ‘Anno Domini (A.D.).
Let’s	 get	 this	 clarified	 through	 an	
example; Arahat Mahinda Thero arrived 
in our country 250 years before the birth 
of Jesus Christ. Hence, it is considered 
that this event took place in 250 B.C.
 
King Mahasen who constructed 
Minneriya    tank, started reigning Sri 
Lanka, 274 years after the birth of Jesus 
Christ. Therefore, it is considered that his 
rule started in 274 A.D.
In addition to what has been mentioned 
above, Buddhist years and Saka years are 
sometimes used to show the time. These 
methods had been used in ancient India 
and Sri Lanka. You may have seen that 
these two types of methods are mentioned 
in almanacs in our houses. These two 
methods are used to calculate historical 
time on some occasions even today.
Buddhist years start since the day on 
which the demise (Maha Parinibbana) of 
the Lord Buddha took place. Although 
scholars hold different views of the year 
in which the demise of the Lord Buddha 
took place, the general belief is that it 
happened	 five	 hundred	 and	 forty	 four	
years before the birth of Jesus Christ, that 
was in 544 B.C.
The system of Saka years is a calendar 
of Hindus. It started in 78 A.D. The king 
Gauthamiputhra Sathakarni who ruled the 
Western India started Saka year system in 
memory of the victory gained over the 
areas of the Saka people. 
There is a chronological method used by 
Muslims to calculate time in celebrating 
their religious festivals. It is called Hijri 
years. It started in 622 A.D. It was the year 
in which Prophet Mohammad, the leader 
of the Islam religion, arrived in the city of 
Madeena from Mecca.  
In addition to these methods, there are a 
number of methods used in laboratories 
to calculate the ancient history of 
some hundred thousand years.  Time 
can be calculated by digging the earth 
systematically too. This process is known 
as archaeological excavation. When the 
earth is excavated, soil layers under the 
earth could be seen. Various things, which 
belonged to the past and did not decay    
easily, have deposited on these soil layers. 
More ancient things have deposited on 
the lowest layer of the soil while things 
belonging to the recent past are deposited 
on the higher layers of the soil. 

Times in which a few historically 
important events took place according to 
the method of A.D. :-
Sri Lanka became an independent 
country - 1948 A.D.
 The beginning of King Mahasen’s rule
 – 274 A.D.
The beginning of King Vasabha's rule 
 – 67 A.D.
Birth of Jesus Christ – 1 A.D.
Demise ( Maha Parinibbana) of the Lord 
Buddha – 544 B.C.
  Most of the things that existed in the past are now buried. Their ruins are still remaining in the soil layers of the earth. We can learn about history by digging the earth carefully.

Time in which a few historically important 
events took place  according to the method 
of Buddhist Era :-
The beginning of King Mahasen’s rule 
 – 818 Buddhist Era
The beginning of King Vasabha’s rule 
 – 611 Buddhist Era
Birth (nativity) of Jesus Christ – 544 
Buddhist Era
Demise (Maha Parinibbana) of Lord 
Buddha – 1 Buddhist Era            

 Important Points:
1). Everything that man did in the past belongs to the history.2). What helps us to learn history is called a source. They are divided into two types 
named literary sources and archaeological sources.
3). Studying history will lead us to realize what is happening at present and what we should plan to do in the future.
4). There are methods to understand the time in which some events took place. The year system based on the birth of Jesus Christ (A.D.) and the year system based on the demise (Maha Parinibbana) of the Lord Buddha (Buddhist Era) are prominent among them.
