5.2 King Devanampiyatissa
King Mutaseewa was the father of King Devanampiyatissa. History has no record of who his mother was. King Devanampiyatissa had nine brothers and two sisters. The king was the second child of the family. His name was Tissa before he became the king. Prince Tissa became the king after King Mutaseewa. During that time India was ruled by emperor Ashoka. After king Tissa came into power, he sent a group of emissaries to meet emperor Ashoka. Prince Aritta was the leader of the group of emissaries. On their return to Sri Lanka, emperor Ashoka sent what was necessary for king Tissa for his coronation. King Tissa’s coronation ceremony was held according to the instructions given by emperor Ashoka. The title “Devanampiya” used by emperor Ashoka was later added to King Tissa’s name. Its meaning was ‘adorable to god’.

Mihindu Thero : O King, what is this tree?
King: Reverand Sir, this is a mango tree.
Mihindu Thero: King, are there other mango trees except for this one?
King: Yes, reverend Sir, there are many other mango trees.
Mihindu Thero: O King, are there other trees except those mango trees?
King: Yes, reverend Sir, there are other trees, but they are not mango trees.
Mihindu Thero: O King, are there other trees except those mango and non-mango trees?
King: Yes, reverend Sir, it is this mango tree.
The king astutely answered to the questions asked by reverend Mihidu Thero. Mihindu Thero realized that the king was an intelligent person.

Arahath Mahinda (Mihindu), the son of emperor Ashoka, with a group of Bhikkhus brought Buddhism to Sri Lanka when king Devanampiyatissa was ruling this country. This remarkable event took place 237 years after the demise of the Buddha. The king acknowledged them with great honour. Arahath Mahinda knew the fact that the king of the country should be intellegent if Buddhism would be established in the country. At this moment Arahath Mahinda asked a few questions from the king pointing at a mango tree close by.
King Devanampiyatissa venerated the group of Arahath Bhikkhus namely Ittiya, Uttiya, Sambala, Baddhasala and the Bhikkhu Sumana Samanera (novice) together with a layman called Bhanduka led by Arahath Mahinda, immensely. He constructed the Mahamewuna garden and a temple called Tissarama in it and offered them to Arahath Mahinda.

Thuparamaya
Thuparamaya was built by king Devanampiyatissa. He did not have an idea of the shape of a tope (Dageba). Therefore, he enquired it from Arahath Mahinda Thero. He pointed out the king that it should be of a shape of a heap of paddy. Accordingly, Thuparama was constructed in a Dhanyakara (paddy-heaped shape). However, it took a shape of a bell as a result of reconstruction work ensued at later periods. At present it has the shape of a bell (Ghantakara). 
There are three rows of stone posts around Thuparama. They are ruins of an old building erected to protect the Dageba. A building of that nature was called a Vatadageya. (A Vatadageya is a circular house encircling a tope). A building of Vatadageya for Thuparamaya was erected by King Vasabha. The right collar-bone of the Lord Buddha has been deposited in the Thuparama.

Thuparama Dageba in Anuradhapura was constructed by king Devanampiyatissa. He constructed some other buildings including a Dana Sala (a house for the purpose of collecting and offering meals for Bhikkhus) named Lahabath Ge. He built a few pirivenas as needed for the studies of the Bhikkhus and named the area as Maha Vihara and offered it to the Maha Sangha.

During king Devanampiyatissa's rule a sappling of Sri Maha Bodhi  was  brought to this country by the nun Sangamitta Theri.

Sri  Maha  Bodhi was brought to Sri Lanka during the rule of King Devanampiyatissa. The nun, Ven. Sangamitta Theri, brought this sacred object in a ship from India and landed on the harbour 'Dambakolapatuna'. The Dambakolapatuna harbour was located in Jaffna then. The king who went to welcome both Sri Maha Bodhi and the nun  Sangamitta Theri, accompanied them to Anuradhapura ceremoniously. A group of people who represented eighteen crafts arrived in Sri Lanka with the nun Sangamitta. The king planted the Sri Maha Bodhi in the garden 'Maha Mewuna' in a ceremony. Further, he erected a building called Maha Bogeya and offered it to the Maha Sangha. In addition, he constructed places such as ponds for the use of the Bhikkhus.
The king had the caves in Mihintale mountain cleaned and offered them to Arahath Mahinda along with those who had already ordained. These caves are known as Ata Seta Len (sixty eight caves) as they were sixty eight in number.
Another important task performed by King Devanampiyatissa was demarcating the borders of Anuradhapura city. The king did so with the intention of constructing more Buddhist temples and making the city more beautiful. Arahath Mahinda gave instructions to the king in demarcating the city. Historical records say that the king gave directions to demarcate the city with a plough drawn by two tuskers named Maha Paduma and Kunja according to the instructions given by Arahath Mahinda. 
King Devanampiyatissa was the first king to embrace Buddhism in Sri Lanka. The nun order (Bhikkhuni Sasana or Meheni Sasna) of Sri Lanka started after the ordination of queen Anula, the wife of king Devanampiyatissa’s brother. The Bhikkhu order (the Bhikkhu Sasana) of this country started with the ordination of prince Aritta, a son of a relative of the king. We too had the opportunity to be Buddhists due to king Devanampiyatissa’s intelligence and piety. You too should be determined to serve the country by keeping the great service done by the king in your mind.

Important Points
1. The title ‘Devanampiya’ attached to the name of king Devanampiyatissa means ‘adorable to god’.
2. King Devanampiyatissa had his coronation for the second time under emperor Ashoka’s patronage.
3. Buddhism and a branch of Sri Maha Bodhi were brought to Sri Lanka during the rule of King Devanampiyatissa.
4. Thuparama Dageba in Anuradhapura was built by king Devanampiyatissa.
5. Demarcating Anuradhapura city was done during his rule. 

