5.1 King Pandukabhaya

Prince Deeghagamini was king Pandukabhaya’s father. His mother was Princess Chithra. A Brahman named Pandula taught prince Pandukabhaya. Historical books describe that the prince underwent a lot of problems during his childhood. There were people who did not like the prince Pandukabhaya to be the king. They attempted to prevent him from becoming the king. However, the prince overcame all the obstacles by acting intelligently. When he was young, he married a princess named Swarnapali and became the king of the country.
King Pandukabhaya ruled the country residing in Anuradhapura. Then it was called Anuradhagama, because it was not a well developed area then. The king wanted to develop the area where he was living and to change its name to Anuradhapura. 
First,	the king identified the	area which should be named as Anuradhapura and marked the limits of the city. Then, for defence, he constructed a moat around the area, in which he would intend to build his city. He built four gates to enter the city from the four main directions and constructed a road system to connect the gates. Further, he made the interior part of the city beautiful by constructing gardens and ponds.
The king was intelligent enough to understand that removing garbage was needed when people live in a city. He appointed servants for removing garbage from the city.	He appointed five hundred servants to clean the city, twenty two servants to clean lavatories, one hundred and fifty servants	to carry dead bodies and another one	hundred	and fifty to clean and guard the graveyards. 
The king built a hospital for the needs of the citizens. He constructed temples and religious places for people who had faith for various religions in order to create religious harmony among them. The blacksmiths believed in a god called Kammaradeva during that time. The king constructed temples (devalas) for the blacksmiths and the aborigines (the Wedda community) to worship their gods near the Western gate of the city. In the same way, he built religious places for other priests for their religious observances.                       

It was the king Pandukabhaya who constructed a tank near a city for the first time. Then it was	called Abaya Wewa (tank). Today it is known as Basawakkulama tank in Anuradhapura.
King Pandukabhaya ruled the country for seventy years striving hard to render a yeoman service to his citizens. He faced many hardships during his childhood, but he overcame them and dedicated himself for the country’s benefit. It is an	example	for you. You should be determined to be a respectable citizen by taking the  king Pandukabhaya's life as an example.

Important Points
1. Prince Pandukabhaya had to face many hardships during his childhood.
2. However, he overcame all his hardships and obstacles and became the king of the country. Princess Swarnapali was his queen. 
3. King Pandukabhaya developed the previous Anuradhagama a city. Later it was known as Anuradhapura.
4. He made Anuradhapura an attractive city.
5. It is King Pandukabhaya who constructed a tank (Wewa) near a city for the first time. It was named Abhaya Wewa.
