5.5 King Vasabha
The parents of King Vasabha are not known. There are no historical records on his parents. He had spent his childhood at his uncle’s place. The uncle of King Vasabha served as the army general of the country. King Vasabha belonged to a lineage named ‘Lambakarna’. The people from the lineage of Lambakarna were in charge of documentary affairs of the country then. A few great kings from the Lambakarna lineage ruled Sri Lanka. King Vasabha was the first to rule this country representing the Lambakarna dynasty.
This king rendered a great service to the progress of  Buddhism and the citizens. Specially, the development process of constructing tanks took place during king Vasabha’s rule. He constructed eleven tanks large in size for the first time. Twelve canals were constructed to carry water from tanks to the paddy fields. The Elahera canal (Elahera Ela) which carries water up to a distance of 30 miles was constructed by King Vasabha.
A few places where there are tanks constructed by King Vasabha have been discovered. The tank named ‘Mayenthi’ constructed by him is presently known as ‘Mahawilachchiya Wewa’. The tank named ‘Manaketi’ then is presently known as ‘Manankattiya Wewa’.  The tank presently named ‘Nochchipothana Wewa’ was called ‘Wathamangana Wewa’ then. All these tanks are located in Anuradhapura district. The engineers of King Vasabha introduced the system of carrying water through tubes under ground instead of the then existed system of taking water through canals to bathing ponds.

The king had learnt that the aroma of Desaman flowers(jasmine) was the sweetest	of all other flowers. The king wanted to check whether it was a truth. He kept a handful of flowers from a few varieties in a room. He placed the same quantity of jasmine flowers among the other varieties too. Then he went out of the room and closed the door behind. After some time, the king opened the door and suddenly smelt the aroma of jasmine flowers before that of the	other flowers. Thus, he accepted that what he had learnt was true. The story shows how watchful the king was in believing something.

The king divided the country into areas and appointed officers to oversee them in order to make the administration easy. Accordingly, a minister named ‘Isigiriya’ was appointed to oversee the present day ‘Jaffna’ area. This information has been written in a golden plate. This golden plate is called ‘ Vallipuram’ golden plate. There is a record in the Vallipuram golden plate that minister Isigiriya constructed a temple in Jaffna. Since the golden plate was found in a place named ‘Vallipuram’ in Jaffna, it is called by that name.
The king rendered a great service to enhance the beauty as well as the security of Anuradhapura city. He made arrangements to build a wall around the Anuradhapura city. The ruins of this wallcould be seen in Anuradhapura even today. He constructed ponds in the city and developed a system to take water to them from the tanks. The king instructed relevant officers to rear swans in them.
His contribution to the enhancement of Buddhism was also great. He constructed a Vatadage around Thuparama Dageba, and a Pohoya  Geya (Chapter house) in the Isurumuniya temple and conferred them to the monks.
He constructed Stupas in the Sithulpawwa temple in Tissamaharama. Further, he took steps to renovate the temples situated in various parts of our country.
The king had to invest a large sum of money for the betterment of his subjects. The king introduced a tax system because he wanted to encourage people to use public property	 carefully and to find needed money to maintain them. Accordingly, those who used water in the tanks had to pay a certain amount of money as tax. In turn, the money collected in that way was spent on renovating the tanks.
King Vasabha, who ruled the country for forty four years, created a new era in this country. His courage, intelligence and watchfulness set a good example for your life.

Important Points
1. King Vasabha was the prime-mover of the dynasty called ‘Lambhakarna’.
2. He rendered a great service to the irrigation of this country. He constructed 11 large tanks.
3. The ‘Vallipuram’ golden plate was written during his ruling time.
4. The king introduced a tax system to increase the local income of the country and divided the country into administrative units for easy ruling.
