Ancient Man

Introduction
Man lives on the earth. It is the world 
of every one of us. It is the home for man as well as for other animals and trees. The earth provides food and other necessities for all of us. All animals and vegetation living on earth are different from each other. These differences occurred due to the changes in the environment of various parts of the earth. The earth affected man, other animals and vegetation equally. Therefore, it is 
important for everyone of us to learn something about the earth on which we live. In this lesson you will learn about the formation of the earth and the origin of species on it.


Part I
2.1 The Environment Where Man's Origin Took Place
Origin of Earth and Life

The earth where we live is a planet. 
Its origin goes back to a past of  four thousand five hundred and forty	million	years. Scientists hold different views on the formation of the earth. However, the common belief is that the earth was formed from a cloud of dust in the sky. Such a cloud of dust is known as a ‘nebula’. When the earth was formed, it was very warm. But gradually it became cool. However, the central part of the earth is still extremely hot.  It has been calculated that its temperature is about 6,000 degrees of Celsius. Water boils at 100 degrees of Celsius. Now you can imagine the intensity of the temperature in the inner part of the earth. When volcanoes erupt, the elements seething in the central part of the earth pour out. They are called 'lava'.
Species originated sometime after the formation	 of the	 earth.	 What first appeared on the earth with a life is a thing which could not be seen with the naked eye. It is known as ‘Prokaryote Bacteria’. This bacteria appeared on the earth two thousand and five hundred million years	ago.
A fossilized mark of a creature, which lived five hundred and forty two	million	years ago, has been discovered in Canada. This creature is between 4 cm and 7 cm in length. It had lived in the sea bed. It had a mouth to eat and five eyes. It	is known as ‘Opabinia’.First species in the world originated in water. They came to the land sometime later. First, a type of creatures similar to millipedes appeared on land. That happened four hundred and twenty million years ago. It is called ‘The Silurian’ era.
First, plants spread on the land before animals. That happened five hundred forty two million years ago. This time is known as ‘The Paleozoic’ era. In comparison with the time when plants and animals appeared on the earth, man appeared many years later.  It will be described in the next lesson.

Important Points
1. The earth was formed four thousand five hundred and forty million years ago. It was formed from a cloud of dust in the sky.
2. The earth, which was very warm, gradually got cool. But it has not yet become completely cool.
3. Living beings originated on the earth much later. Life first	originated in water.
4. First, a tiny bacteria originated in the world.5. First, plants appeared. Secondly, animals originated on the earth.
